---
title: 'Release notes for v5.2.0'
layout: news-item
snip:
    Chebfun Version 5.2.0 has been released.
---

We are pleased to announce the release of Chebfun Version 5.2.0 for numerical
computing with 1D and 2D functions. The main new features are:

* A fast implementation of the discrete Legendre transform (DLT) and its
  inverse (IDLT).
* epslevel accuracy estimates have been disabled (fixed at machine
  epsilon and no longer displayed when printing a `chebfun`).
* Automatic vectorization for anonymous functions used to specify chebop
  operators and boundary conditions. For example, `N.op = @(x,u)
  x.*diff(u) + u.^2` can now be replaced by `N.op = @(x,u) x*diff(u) + u^2`.
* `chebop` `null` method for systems of equations.
* `pde23t`, significantly faster than `pde15s` for non-diffusive PDEs.
  `pde23t` is now also an option in `chebgui`.
* Periodic discretization of periodic PDEs in `pde15s` and `pde23t`
  (specify boundary conditions as 'periodic').
* Minimax approximation of periodic functions via `trigremez`.
* Support for fractional integrals and derivatives of smooth chebfuns,
  by passing non-integer arguments to `diff` and `cumsum`.

In addition, significant speed-ups have been achieved for evaluation of
`chebfun2` objects, QR factorizations of tall and skinny quasimatrices,
piecewise ODEs and for solving PDEs in `chebgui`.  Finally, various bugs have
been fixed and documentation has been improved.

We hope you enjoy the new release.  Feel free to contact us at
<help@chebfun.org> if you have any questions or comments.
